Arkham House: The First 20 Years; 1939-1959 by August Derleth
Though it was not immediately foreseen, Arkham House had its inception in the death of Howard Phillips Lovecraft on March 15, 1937. The first word of Lovecraft’s death came in a letter from the late Howard Wandrei, then in New York, a letter I read on my way into the marshes below Sauk City, where I had intended to spend an afternoon reading Thoreau’s Journal. Instead, I sat at a railroad trestle beside the brook and considered ways and means of putting together Lovecraft’s best works and bringing them out in book form.

I was under no illusions about the difficulty of persuading a New York publisher to bring out such a collection, for, in the broadest sense, Lovecraft was relatively obscure, he wrote in a vein for which there has never been too large an audience, and all his previous submissions[Pg ii] of book manuscripts to publishers like Putnam, Knopf and others had been futile—though it should be said in favor of the publishers and their readers that Lovecraft, certain of their failure, customarily submitted dog-eared, hardly legible manuscripts, which were certainly enough to discourage all but the most hardy reader.

Once back at my typewriter later that afternoon, I wrote Donald Wandrei that something should be done to keep Lovecraft’s work in print; he replied that collecting only the stories, as I had thought to do, was not enough—all the work should be collected and eventually published, including the marvellously instructive and entertaining letters. I lost no further time in collecting and arranging the stories, which were put into typescript by my then secretary, Alice Conger, and immediately submitted to Charles Scribner’s Sons. Scribner’s were at that time my own publishers, and, while sympathetic to the project and cognizant of the literary value of Lovecraft’s fiction, rejected the manuscript because the cost of producing so bulky a book, combined with the public’s then sturdy resistance to buying short story collections and the comparative obscurity of H. P. Lovecraft as a writer, made the project financially prohibitive. Simon & Schuster, to whom the manuscript was next submitted, likewise rejected, for similar reasons.

It was at this point that the idea of publishing the omnibus under an imprint of our own occurred to me[Pg iii] and took hold. I wrote again to Donald Wandrei, setting forth my plan. Both of us were impecunious writers—and how rare is the writer who is not!—but I was at that time building a home for which a local bank had advanced a considerable loan (not, however, without four times the amount of the loan in collateral, as is the invariable custom of banks), and it occurred to me that there was one manifest course open to a would-be publisher—to advertise for advance prepaid orders, and to pay off the printer from the sum of my loan. To this, Donald Wandrei added what small sum he could scrape together at that time, at great personal sacrifice; and, with the full co-operation of Lovecraft’s surviving aunt, Mrs. Annie E. Phillips Gamwell, and Robert H. Barlow, the project took shape.

There was never any question about the name of our publishing house. Arkham House suggested itself at once, since it was Lovecraft’s own well-known, widely-used place-name for legend-haunted Salem, Massachusetts, in his remarkable fiction; it seemed to us that this was fitting and that Lovecraft himself would have approved it enthusiastically. And, once the project had been decided upon, there was never any question about the printer chosen to do it—we turned at once to the nearest, most widely-known printer—the George Banta Company of Menasha, Wisconsin, whose plant was only a hundred miles distant.

[Pg iv]

But by this time two years had elapsed since Lovecraft’s death, and by the time initial announcements of the work appeared in Weird Tales, offering prepaid advance-ordered copies of The Outsider and Others—a title selected because it had been once mentioned by Lovecraft himself as a possible title for a collection of his work, and because Lovecraft was in a very real sense, as well as in his own concept of himself, an outsider in the twentieth century—the book was being made ready for publication, Donald Wandrei was reading proof, and labels were being printed for shipment of copies. Advance-ordered, prepaid copies of the book were offered at $3.50 the copy, in contrast to the published price of $5.00 for the omnibus, of which 1,268 copies were delivered to me in late 1939.

Incredible as it may seem to today’s ardent searchers for that first Lovecraft collection, orders at $3.50 the copy came in very slowly. By publication, only 150 prepaid orders had come in. To the sum thus collected, Donald Wandrei added $400.00; the remainder of the not small sum was lifted, much to the horror of the local bankers, from my loan (though it was soon replaced—not out of earnings from sales, but out of my personal income from various writing projects). The book did not lack publicity; our venture was given generous space in the Publishers’ Weekly and other trade media, though it was so thoroughly ignored locally that even today, after two[Pg v] decades, not one in fifty persons in Sauk City and the area of the village could identify Arkham House if asked to do so by an outsider.

The Outsider and Others sold with discouraging slowness. Nevertheless, it seemed to me, judging by the enthusiasm shown by buyers, that there might be a market for small editions of books in the general field of fantasy, perhaps with emphasis on the macabre or science-fiction. To that end, I prepared early in 1941 a slender collection of my own best stories in the genre and submitted them, according to my contractual obligations, to Charles Scribner’s Sons. Up to this time there had been no thought of publishing through Arkham House the work of anyone but H. P. Lovecraft; it remained for William C. Weber of Scribner’s to suggest that my collection, Someone in the Dark, ought properly to be published under the Arkham House imprint, since a specialized house could very probably do better with such a book than could Scribner’s.

After much soul-searching, I took Weber’s advice, and brought out Someone in the Dark at $2.00 the copy. This had the additional effect of keeping the Arkham House imprint before the public eye while other Lovecraft works were in preparation. When the initial costs of the second Arkham House book were met before those of The Outsider and Others, I began to explore the possibility of publishing further books in the field. Despite the fact[Pg vi] that because of his induction into the U. S. Army, where he served four years, Donald Wandrei was forced to sever all but the most cursory connection with Arkham House in 1942, that year saw publication of the third Arkham House title, Clark Ashton Smith’s Out of Space and Time, at $3.00 the copy.

The three-dollar price seemed to be the most satisfactory one; the publishers could honestly show that $2.00 was too little, and readers had complained that $5.00 was too much for a book in 1939—though some of those same plaintiffs, having refused The Outsider and Others at $5.00, paid $25.00 and $35.00 for it ten years later, even $50.00 and $65.00. Yet the $5.00 price had to be maintained for the omnibus collections, and in 1943 the second Lovecraft omnibus, Beyond the Wall of Sleep, was published in an edition limited by wartime restrictions to but 1,217 copies.

The first quartet of books to bear the imprint of Arkham House—published from 1939 to 1944—though getting off to a slow selling start with the initial Lovecraft title, had by the end of 1943 gained such momentum that it was obvious that few if any of these books would be left for sale by the end of 1944. The Outsider and Others took four years to sell out its only printing, and actually, what with overhead and other costs, it took approximately that long to return our initial investment. But by 1944 it was manifest that there was a distinct—if[Pg vii] relatively small—market for collections of weird, fantastic, science-fiction short stories, and I determined to publish as many such collections as possible, with emphasis on the hitherto unpublished, but not scorning works long out of print.

Pushing ahead, I commissioned Frank Utpatel, the Wisconsin artist who had done the illustrations for Lovecraft’s The Shadow Over Innsmouth in 1936, to design a house colophon. This made its first appearance in our next book, Donald Wandrei’s The Eye and the Finger. In addition to this title, three other Arkham House titles appeared in 1944; they were Henry S. Whitehead’s Jumbee and Other Uncanny Tales; Clark Ashton Smith’s Lost Worlds, and Marginalia, by H. P. Lovecraft, with contributions by others. By the end of 1945, the Arkham House list had been augmented by the addition of my own Something Near; Robert Bloch’s The Opener of the Way; the first Arkham House fantasy novel, Evangeline Walton’s Witch House; J. Sheridan LeFanu’s Green Tea and Other Ghost Stories; and The Lurker at the Threshold, a novel suggested in notes and fragments written by Lovecraft, finished by myself.

The year 1945 was also the year in which Arkham House introduced two allied imprints—Mycroft & Moran, specializing in off-trail sleuthing tales, the first of which was my own “In Re: Sherlock Holmes”—The Adventures of Solar Pons, a collection of pastiches of[Pg viii] Sherlock Holmes published at the urging of Vincent Starrett, who wrote the introduction for the volume, and Ellery Queen, who was to write the introduction for the later The Memoirs of Solar Pons; and Stanton & Lee, which concentrated on reprints or on collections of comic cartoons, principally those by the late Clare Victor Dwiggins, and which made its bow with Dwig’s Bill’s Diary, the Derleth-Dwig juvenile for pixilated adults, Oliver, the Wayward Owl, and a new printing of my Scribner novel, Evening in Spring, from the Scribner plates. The Mycroft & Moran imprint came straight out of the Holmes canon—from Mycroft Holmes, Sherlock’s illustrious brother, and Colonel Sebastian Moran, the second most dangerous man in London. The house colophon was designed as a deerstalker by Ronald Clyne. Stanton & Lee took rise from the names of two friends, one an employee; its colophons were designed by Howard Wandrei—which appeared only in Evening in Spring—and by Ronald Clyne.

Publication of the initial LeFanu collection, of stories long out of print in America, marked the beginning of Arkham House’s importation of titles from abroad. Since many of the best writers in the genre were British, it seemed to me necessary to add to our list such names as would bring prestige to the Arkham House imprint. Thus, the year 1946 witnessed publication of four British importations—Algernon Blackwood’s last book of new work,[Pg ix] The Doll and One Other; A. E. Coppard’s Fearful Pleasures; H. Russell Wakefield’s The Clock Strikes Twelve, and an omnibus reprint of four novels—William Hope Hodgson’s The House on the Borderland and Other Novels; as well as three books by members of the Lovecraft circle of writers who, like him, contributed primarily to Weird Tales in earlier years—Frank Belknap Long’s The Hounds of Tindalos; Robert E. Howard’s Skull-Face and Others; and Henry S. Whitehead’s West India Lights, together with the first Arkham House science-fiction novel, the popular Astounding Science-Fiction serial, Slan, by A. E. Van Vogt.

The year 1946 was in a sense a year of publishing instruction. It was not until that year, for example, that I finally learned what the average size of a printing ought to be—not 4,000, which some of our books had run, but 2,000, with occasional printings of up to 3,000. By that year the limited space in my home was being taken up by Arkham House stock, despite the fact that books sold rapidly. The experiences of that year also demonstrated conclusively that a small publishing business like Arkham House could afford very little overhead. Indeed, had it not been for the pouring into Arkham House of $25,000 of personal income from my writing over the first ten years, the House could not have survived. I had come to publishing without any previous experience, other than a limited editorial stint with Fawcett Publications,[Pg x] with which I had been associated briefly in 1930-31; and I had to learn step by step, often painfully, invariably expensively. In 1946, production costs had begun to rise also, still further cutting into any possible profit margin, since the price of Arkham House books remained fixed.

Nevertheless, despite increased costs of publication, Arkham House in 1947 released Lady Cynthia Asquith’s This Mortal Coil; Ray Bradbury’s first distinguished collection, Dark Carnival (later revised and issued under the Ballantine imprint as The October Country); Carl Jacobi’s Revelations in Black; my own anthology of fantastic and macabre poetry, Dark of the Moon; Fritz Leiber Jr.’s Night’s Black Agents; and, under the Mycroft & Moran imprint, William Hope Hodgson’s Carnacki, the Ghost-Finder, a far more comprehensive collection than the British edition of almost forty years before, since it contained three new stories, two never before printed, discovered among Hodgson’s manuscripts by his sister.

In 1948, in addition to the publication of five titles, Arkham House brought out its only illustrated book, Seabury Quinn’s Roads, with pictures by Virgil Finlay, and inaugurated the publication of a literary quarterly, The Arkham Sampler, devoted to matters fantastic, publishing fiction, poetry, letters, articles, bibliographical data, et alia, to sell at $1.00 the copy. This venture, however,[Pg xi] was ill-fated; it was begun in a falling market and at a time of greatly increased production costs, and, while the subscription to the first four issues readily met costs, that for the second year, 1949, failed to do so, and the magazine—which was taking an inexcusably large amount of the editor-publisher’s time—was reluctantly discontinued, since Arkham House could not publish it at a loss of both time and money.

The close of the first decade of publishing saw a substantial number of Arkham House titles out of print—The Outsider and Others, Someone in the Dark, Out of Space and Time, Beyond the Wall of Sleep, The Eye and the Finger, Jumbee and Other Uncanny Tales, Lost Worlds, Marginalia, Something Near, The Opener of the Way, Slan, Green Tea and Other Ghost Stories—and selling for fantastic prices in the out-of-print shops. Recent titles had doubled in value, and the rare first Arkham House book had been reported as sold at $100.00 for a pristine copy. In addition, adjunctive books prepared by the editor for release under the Rinehart imprint out of New York—anthologies like Sleep No More, Who Knocks? and The Night Side—were likewise out of print, and others, prepared for Pellegrini & Cudahy, were being reprinted—The Sleeping and the Dead, Strange Ports of Call, The Other Side of the Moon. Most significant of all, by 1950 almost a dozen other small houses had mushroomed into existence to follow the lead[Pg xii] of Arkham House, and several major publishing houses were bringing out science-fiction.

Nevertheless, it was evident that the crest of the wave of interest in fantasy had been reached, and that the recession was certain to follow. Arkham House therefore prepared, after but two books in 1949, to hedge the ambitious program announced in that year. A cautious, if predominantly optimistic conservatism prevailed; had it been otherwise, Arkham House would certainly have shared the fate of most of its imitators, which, lacking any real editorial guidance from people widely-read in the field, spewed forth many books of no merit whatsoever, cluttered the market, and succeeded in turning away potential buyers from the field in general.

When, in the mid-fifties, Arkham House began to resume a publishing schedule, production costs were so high that the price range could no longer be held. The entry of competitive publishers in the genre had had one other unhappy effect which directly influenced the decision in regard to prices—whereas, heretofore, between 400 and 600 patrons of Arkham House sent in prepaid orders for each announced title, thus enabling Arkham House to meet printer’s bills within a reasonable time and assure the continuance of a publishing program, such advance-order patrons had now been reduced to between 100 and 200, not enough to give permanence to any program. A disproportionate share of sales was now being[Pg xiii] made through the trade which, however welcome, meant the introduction of middlemen—wholesalers and retailers—into what had been primarily a publisher-reader mail order operation. This resulted in a vital slashing of potential income in the face of a very high and increasing production cost, so that the old $3.00 price could be held only for collections of verse or very slender collections of stories, while other books had to go to $3.50 and $4.00, and even, in some cases, to $5.00, though the $4.00 price was to become the average.

All Arkham House books—together with those under the Mycroft & Moran and Stanton & Lee imprints—have been printed and bound by the George Banta Company, with the exception of The Arkham Sampler, which was produced by the Howe Printing Company of Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin, and Night’s Yawning Peal and Tales from Underwood, which were published jointly with Pellegrini & Cudahy of New York, an arrangement which did not work out satisfactorily and was soon terminated. All Arkham House books were printed from type set and broken down after but one printing, except for The Memoirs of Solar Pons, which was plated, for use as a selection of The Unicorn Mystery Book Club.

For Arkham House jackets, various artists have been called upon, chiefly, however, Ronald Clyne of New York, and Frank Utpatel of Wisconsin. Among other artists who designed jackets for Arkham House were[Pg xiv] Frank Wakefield, Howard Wandrei, Virgil Finley, Robert F. Hubbell, George Barrows, Hannes Bok, Audrey Johnson, R. Taylor, and Gary Gore.

During its first twenty years, Arkham House cancelled publication plans for certain books. Among these were J. Sheridan LeFanu’s novel, The House by the Churchyard, and the anthology, The Death Fetch and Other Gothic Tales, edited by Stephen Grendon, both of which would have proved too costly to bring out, and would, on the basis of interest expressed, have sold far too slowly to warrant publishing. Among these also were the late Henry Kuttner’s Mimsy Were the Borogoves and C. L. Moore’s Shambleau and Other Tales, which were announced, but not published because authors and publisher could not agree on contractual terms. Certain other announced titles—A. E. Van Vogt’s Away and Beyond and The World of Null-A, and Fritz Leiber Jr.’s Gather, Darkness! and Conjure Wife, were released to other publishers who could do more for them.

Arkham House faces the coming years with confidence. Added to the bibliography which is appended, Arkham House hopes and expects to publish, among others, the following books within the coming years:

THE ABOMINATIONS OF YONDO, by Clark Ashton Smith

INVADERS FROM THE DARK, by Greye La Spina

THE TRAIL OF CTHULHU, by August Derleth

STRAYERS FROM SHEOL, by H. Russell Wakefield

[Pg xv]

PLEASANT DREAMS, by Robert Bloch

SELECTED LETTERS, by H. P. Lovecraft

THE HORROR FROM THE HILLS, by Frank Belknap Long

THE PURCELL PAPERS, by J. Sheridan LeFanu

MR. GEORGE AND OTHER ODD PERSONS, by Stephen Grendon

TIME BURIAL, by Howard Wandrei

THREE TALES, by Walter de la Mare

RADIANT MAN, by Donald Wandrei

TALES OF SCIENCE AND SORCERY, by Clark Ashton Smith

HALF IN SHADOW, by Mary Elizabeth Counselman

PORTRAITS BY MOONLIGHT, by Carl Jacobi

XELUCHA AND OTHERS, by M. P. Shiel

STRANGE GATEWAYS, by E. Hoffmann Price

LONESOME PLACES, by August Derleth

THE GREEN ROUND, by Arthur Machen

WORSE THINGS WAITING, by Manly Wade Wellman

BLACK MEDICINE, by Arthur J. Burks

COLONEL MARKESAN AND LESS PLEASANT

PEOPLE, by August Derleth and Mark Schorer

COLLECTED POEMS, by Donald Wandrei

THE WIND IN THE CEDARS, by August Derleth

SELECTED POEMS, by Clark Ashton Smith

COLLECTED POEMS, by H. P. Lovecraft

THE WATCHERS OUT OF TIME, by H. P. Lovecraft and August Derleth

and, under the Mycroft & Moran imprint,

THE REMINISCENCES OF SOLAR PONS, by August Derleth

[Pg xvi]

PRINCE ZALESKI & CUMMINGS KING MONK, by M. P. Shiel

THE CASEBOOK OF SOLAR PONS, by August Derleth

and Stanton & Lee,

EVERETT TRUE, by A. D. Condo
